---
title: Introduction to Grobner Basis
tags: [grobner-basis]
categories: [algebraic-geometry]
date: 2021-08-01
math: true
---

**Introduction** {#sec:introduction}
================

When an algebraic variety $X$ occur in the wild, it is frequently given
by the vanishing set of a possibly infinite set of polynomials
$f_i \in k[x]$, $$X = \mathbb{V} \left(\left\{f_i\right\}_i\right)$$.
And really, it's the ideal generated by the set of polynomials that matter,
$$X = { {\mathbb V}}(I)$$ where
$$I = \left\langle \left\{f_i\right\}_i \right\rangle \subset k[x]$$, and
we call $$\left\{f_i\right\}_i$$ the generating set of $I$. If we wish to
do computation with varieties and their associated ideals, it would be
nice to solve the following:

## **Finite description**

 \
Outside of toy[^1] examples, the initial description of the variety
probably have infinite number of generators $f_i$. It would be nice if
we can reduce to a cleverly selected *finite* set of generators $g_i$
that encode the same ideal. This also begs the question: given another
set of generators $$\left\{g_i\right\}$$, how do we tell with finite
computation that if they describe the same ideal?

## **Ideal membership**

 \
Given another polynomial $p \in k[x]$, can we check that $p$ is in fact
in the ideal $I$? Well, we need to check that $p$ is a finite
combination of the generators, $p = \sum_{i} q_i f_i$ with polynomial
coefficients $q_i \in k[x]$. How do we find those?

## **Identifying the variety from ideal**

 \
Given the ideal, $$I = \left\langle f_i \right\rangle$$ how do we actually
solve the system of polynomial equations, $f_1(x) = f_2(x) = \dots = 0$,
to obtain the points[^2] in the variety.

## **Identifying ideal from variety**

 \
If the variety is instead given by a (rationally) parametrised geometric
object, can we recover the ideal from the parametrisation?


**Special cases**
=================

It turns out that the above problems are satisfactorily solved in
special cases where we either allow multivariables but only restrict to
degree 1 $f_i$ or allowing degree $>1$ but only allow a single variable.
In both cases, we have familiar *algorithms* that compute answers to the
questions we raised above. We shall see later that Gröbner basis is
effectively a simultaneously generalisation of these special cases.

Degree $=1$ but Multivariable - Gaussian Elimination
----------------------------------------------------

Here, we are given $n$ *linear* polynomials[^3] in
$k[x_1, x_2, \dots, x_d]$ 

$$
\begin{aligned}
    f_1(x_1, \dots, x_d) &= a_{11}x_1 + a_{12} x_2 + \dots a_{1d} x_d + c_1 = 0\\
    f_2(x_1, \dots, x_d) &= a_{21}x_1 + a_{22} x_2 + \dots a_{2d} x_d + c_2 = 0\\
    &\vdots \\
    f_n(x_1, \dots, x_d) &= a_{n1}x_1 + a_{n2} x_2 + \dots a_{nd} x_d + c_n = 0
\end{aligned}
$$

and the usual task is to find their vanishing set
$${ {\mathbb V}}\left(f_1, \dots, f_n\right)$$. Here, we can
bring to bear the full weight of linear algebra. In particular, we have
the famous[^4] Gaussian elimination procedure.\
Example, 

$$
\begin{aligned}
    f_1 &= 2x + 3y - z = 0\\
    f_2 &= x + y -1 = 0\\
    f_3 &= x + z -3 = 0
\end{aligned}
$$

Single Variable but Degree $>1$ - Euclidean Algorithm
-----------------------------------------------------

In this case, we have $n$ single variable polynomials in $k[x]$ of
arbitrary degrees $$\begin{aligned}
    f_1(x) &= a_{10} + a_{11}x + \dots + a_{1d_1}x^{d_1}\\
    f_2(x) &= a_{20} + a_{21}x + \dots + a_{2d_2}x^{d_2}\\
    &\vdots\\
    f_n(x) &= a_{n0} + a_{n1}x + \dots + a_{nd_n}x^{d_n}.\\\end{aligned}$$
Fortunately, for $k$ a field, $k[x]$ is an Euclidean domain[^5] and
therefore, by a standard result in algebra, a principal domain, meaning
the ideal $$I = \left\langle f_1, \dots, f_n \right\rangle$$ is actually
generated by a single $g \in I$. Indeed, the ideal is generated by any
element with the lowest degree in $I$. One way to compute a generator is
to simply perform the eponymous Euclidean algorithm for finding
$gcd(f_1, \dots, f_n)$.\
Example, 

$$
\begin{aligned}
    f_1 &= x^4 + x^2 - x -1 \\
    f_2 &= x^3 -1
\end{aligned}
$$

**Generalising Long Division**
==============================

As we saw above, an essential feature of the single variable case that
makes the Euclidean algorithm work is the ability to do long division.
Put it another way, given polynomial $p$ and polynomial divisor $f$ , we
can find the quotient polynomial $q$ such that $p = qf + r$ with $r$
having lower degree than the divisor $f$.\
We seek to generalise the above in two ways: 1) we allow multivariate
polynomials $p \in k[x_1, \dots, xd]$ and 2) we are allow to divide by a
finite set of polynomials $f_1, \dots f_n$. Meaning want to find a set
of quotients $q_1, \dots, q_n$ and a possibly zero polynomial remainder
$r$ such that $$\begin{aligned}
    p = q_1 f_1 + \dots + q_n f_n + r\end{aligned}$$ where we enforce
that $r$ cannot in some sense be further divided by any of the $f_i$.\
The generalisation is rather straight forward. However, as we shall see,
it loses some desirable properties that we rely on in the two special
cases we investigated.

**Leading Monomial Hold Center Stage**
======================================

The last example is particularly galling. Getting zero remainder
immediately give us an expression of $p = q_1f_1 + \dots + q_nf_n$ which
is a witness that $$p \in \left\langle f_1, \dots, f_n \right\rangle$$.
However, whether we end up with zero remainder or not depend on how we
order the generators. Worse still, sometimes the division produces
\"intermediate\" remainder terms. In either case, even if[^6] $p \in I$,
whether we get zero remainder is a matter of luck and the issue seems to
be that the algorithm run into a blocker: The leading term of some
intermediate remainder ${\mathrm{LT}}(r)$ is no longer
divisible by any leading term ${ {\mathrm{LT}}}(f_i)$ of the
generating polynomials. **This is the root of all evil.**\
To rephrase, we have the scenario that some combination $\sum q_i f_i$
of the generators produces remainder[^7], $r = p - \sum q_i f_i \in I$,
but ${ {\mathrm{LT}}}(r)$ is no longer divisible by any of
${ {\mathrm{LT}}}(f_i)$, i.e.
${ {\mathrm{LT}}}(r)$ is not in the ideal generated by
${ {\mathrm{LT}}}(f_1), \dots, { {\mathrm{LT}}}(f_n)$.
Varying $q_i$, the expression of the form $p - \sum q_i f_i$ is all of
$I$, so our issue is that[^8] $$\begin{aligned}
    \left\langle { {\mathrm{LT}}}(f_1),{ {\mathrm{LT}}}(f_2), \dots \right\rangle \neq \left\langle { {\mathrm{LT}}}(I) \right\rangle \end{aligned}$$
where
$$\mathrm{LT}(I) = \left\{{ {\mathrm{LT}}}(p) \, \, : \,p \in I\right\}$$.\
Since it is really the ideal that we care about, not the given
generators per se, our quest to solve the problems pose at the beginning
would be resolved if we can find another set of generators[^9]
$G \subset I$ such that we do have

$$
\left\langle { {\mathrm{LT}}}(G) \right\rangle =  \left\langle { {\mathrm{LT}}}(I) \right\rangle.
$$

Monomially Generated Ideals
---------------------------

Our problem motivate the study of ideals that are generated by all
leading terms of $p \in I$. These generating sets are monomials.

An ideal $I \subset k[x_1, \dots, x_d]$ is monomially generated[^10] if
it has a (potentially infinite) generating set consist of only
monomials.\
That is 

$$
\begin{aligned}
        I = \left\langle x^\alpha \, \, : \,\alpha \in A \right\rangle
\end{aligned}
$$ 
for some multiindex set $A \subset { {\mathbb N}}^d$.

Fortunately for us, it turns out that the membership problem for
monomially generated ideals is simpler.

A monomial $x^\beta$ is in a monomially generated ideal
$$I = \left\langle x^\alpha \, \, : \,\alpha \in A \right\rangle$$ if and
only if $x^\alpha$ divides $x^\beta$ for some $\alpha \in A$.
Furthermore, any polynomial $p$ is in $I$ if and only if all of its
monomial is in $I$.[@Cox2013-xd Chapter 2.4, Lemma 2]

In other words, we can test ideal membership of a monomial by testing if
$\beta \geq \alpha$ for some $\alpha \in A$ with the lexicographic
ordering on ${ {\mathbb N}}^d$.

A main result here is that

Monomially generated ideals are finitely generated by monomials.
Furthermore, the finite generating set can be chosen from any monomial
generating set. [@Cox2013-xd Chapter 2.4, Theorem 5]

This is more or less the Hilbert basis theorem for monomially generated
ideals and we shall see that this result extends directly to the full
Hilbert basis theorem.\

**Gröbner Basis**
=================

We are very close to our **AH HA!** moment. Our problem is that the
leading terms of the original generators $f_i$ does not generate
$$\left\langle { {\mathrm{LT}}}(I) \right\rangle$$. But
$$\left\langle { {\mathrm{LT}}}(I) \right\rangle$$ is a
monomially generated ideal and Dickson's lemma says that it is actually
finitely generated by some
$${ {\mathrm{LT}}}(g_1), \dots, { {\mathrm{LT}}}(g_m)$$, $g_i \in I$. In other words, 

$$
\begin{aligned}
    \left\langle { {\mathrm{LT}}}(g_1), \dots,{ {\mathrm{LT}}}(g_m) \right\rangle = \left\langle { {\mathrm{LT}}}(I) \right\rangle.
\end{aligned}
$$
All we need is that these $g_i$'s will themselves, with their trailing
terms and all, generate all of $I$. Well, they do!

Let $I \subset k[x_1, \dots, x_d]$ be any ideal. Let
$g_1, \dots, g_m \in I$ be such that
$$\left\langle { {\mathrm{LT}}}(g_1), \dots,{ {\mathrm{LT}}}(g_m) \right\rangle = \left\langle { {\mathrm{LT}}}(I) \right\rangle$$,
then $$\left\{g_1, \dots, g_m\right\}$$ generates $I$.

In honour of such nice property, we give such generating sets a name.

A generating set $$\left\{g_1, \dots, g_m\right\} \subset I$$ of any ideal
$I$ of $k[x_1, \dots, x_d]$ with the property that

$$\left\langle { {\mathrm{LT}}}(g_1), \dots,{ {\mathrm{LT}}}(g_m) \right\rangle = \left\langle { {\mathrm{LT}}}(I) \right\rangle$$

is called a **Gröbner basis**.[^11]

**Buchberger Algorithm for Constructing Gröbner Basis**
=======================================================

Equivalent Characterisations of Gröbner Basis
=============================================

Let $k$ be any field and $I$ be an ideal of the polynomial ring
$k[x_1, \dots, x_d]$ generated by $$G = \left\{g_1, \dots, g_n\right\}$$.
The following are equivalent[^12].

-   $G$ is a Gröbner basis for $I$.

-   for all $p \in k[x_1, \dots, x_d]$, the remainder of $p$ divided by
    $G$ is unique.

-   division of $p$ by $G$ does not generate "intermediate remainder" at
    any stage of the algorithm.

-   $p \in I$ if and only if $p \equiv 0$ mod $G$.

-   $$\left\langle { {\mathrm{LT}}}(G) \right\rangle = \left\langle { {\mathrm{LT}}}(I) \right\rangle$$.

-   for all $p \in I$,
    $${ {\mathrm{LT}}}(p) \in \left\langle { {\mathrm{LT}}}(G) \right\rangle$$.

-   for all $p \in I$, ${ {\mathrm{LT}}}(g_i)$ divides
    $LT(p)$ for some $g_i \in G$.

-   $G$ satisfies Buchberger's criterion.

[^1]: doesn't mean unimportant

[^2]: and hopefully some other geometric information too

[^3]: more precisely degree $=1$ polynomials

[^4]: or infamously tedious according to my first year students

[^5]: informally, an integral domain where the Euclidean algorithm make
    sense and works.

[^6]: there is a little magic happening here where we suddenly restrict
    ourselves to just long division of element of the ideal. Turns out
    solving this case is enough though.

[^7]: difference of elements of the ideal is in the ideal.

[^8]: note that
    $$\left\langle { {\mathrm{LT}}}(f_1),{ {\mathrm{LT}}}(f_2), \dots \right\rangle \subset \left\langle { {\mathrm{LT}}}(I) \right\rangle$$
    follows trivially from definition. It is the reverse inclusion that
    is causing grief.

[^9]: Also note this second jedi mind trick where I switch to using
    notation to ${ {\mathrm{LT}}}(f_1), \dots$ suggesting
    potentially infinite generating set. We are hoping that $G$ turns
    out to be finite regardless of the initial size of
    $$\left\{f_i\right\}$$.

[^10]: [@Cox2013-xd] calls it monomial ideals, but I personally remember
    this name better.

[^11]: more a Gröbner generating set really. It doesn't have the unique
    coefficient property like a basis of vector space.

[^12]: in somewhat increasing order of \"finiteness\"