---
title: Algebraic Geometry - Hartshorne 1.1
tags: [hartshorne, algebraic-geometry]
categories: [algebraic-geometry]
date: 2022-01-03
math: true
image: 
  src: /2022-01-03/
  width: 300
#   height: 50
  alt: image not found
---

This is a series on studying Algebraic Geometry based on the textbook "Algebraic Geometry" by Hartshorne. We start off with the so called "classical algebraic geometry" where the unifying concept of _schemes_ has yet to be introduced. We will define the geometric objects we shall be studying known as algebraic varieties and associate with them algebraic objects where by geometric properties can be extracted via algebraic means. 

- [A Little Motivation](#a-little-motivation)
- [Definition of Affine Varieties](#definition-of-affine-varieties)

# A Little Motivation
It wasn't until a little while after learning a some geometry and algebra at high school and undergraduate level that it finally hits me: "$x^2 + y^2 = 1$" _is_ the circle<span sidenote> well... with lots mathematical preamble suppressed. But that's what the definitions in this section is for.</span>, not just a mere representation or tool to manipulate the set of points on the circle. Not only that, the way -- the algebraic way -- it is presented lends itself to various obvious generalisations that are "correct"<span sidenote> read: plays well with intuitions and other mathematical theories</span>. For instance, definitions higher dimensional analogs is immediate with "$x_1^2 + x_2^2 + \dots + x_n^2 = 1$" and, with perhaps more historical significant, the study of _conic section_ can be unified under the study of general degree 2 polynomials

$$
ax^2 + bxy + cy^2 + dx + ey + f = 0.
$$

Similarly, most students of mathematics need no convincing when it comes to the power of talking about points, lines, planes and hyperplanes and so on in the language of _linear algebra_. 

We shall now define the rather general setting of algebraic varieties to study such association between algebra and geometry. 

# Definition of Affine Varieties
Let's fixed a field $k$. Unless otherwise specified, we shall assume that $k$ is algebraically closed<span sidenote>we shall see why when discuss the celebrated Hilbert Nullstellenstaz. But, with apology, we will be drawing pictures as though $k = \R$.</span>. 

<div class=def>
Let $n \in \N$. We shall call the set of all $n$-tuples of elements in the field $k$ the <span def> $n$-dimensional affine space</span> or the <span def> affine $n$-space</span> and denote it as 

$$
\A_k^n := k^n = \set{(a_1, a_2, \dots, a_n) \wh a_i \in k \text{ for all } i}
$$

We call any element $P = (a_1, \dots, a_n) \in \A_k^n$ of the space a <span def> point </span> with the $a_i$'s being its <span def> coordinates </span>. 
</div>

This should remind us of the familiar case of _cartesian coordinates_ $(x, y) \in \R^2$ used above to defined the circle $x^2 + y^2 = 1$. We are simply generalising this with arbitrary field $k$<span sidenote>meaning we would like to retain the ability to add, multiple, divide and have access to $0$ and $1$.</span> and to arbitrary dimensions. This is the algebraic stage where our geometric objects shall abide. 

<div class=def>
Let $k[x_1, \dots, x_n]$ denote the <span def> ring of polynomials </span> in $n$ variables over $k$. We naturally interpret each polynomial $f \in k[x_1, \dots, x_n]$ as a function $A^n_k \to k$ 

$$
P = (a_1, \dots, a_n) \mapsto f(P) = f(a_1, \dots, a_n)
$$

The preimage of zero of such a polynomial $f$ is called the <span def> zero set </span> or the <span def> vanishing set </span><span sidenote> hence the notation $\V$ for "vanishing"</span> of the function

$$
\V(f) = \set{(a_1, \dots, a_n) \in \A_k^n \st f(a_1, \dots, a_n) = 0}.
$$

We can also talk about the _common vanishing set_ of a set of functions $F \subset k[x_1, \dots, x_n]$ 

$$
\V(F) = \bigcap_{f \in F}\V(f) = \set{P \in \A^n_k \st f(P) = 0 \text{ for all } f \in F}
$$

The set of points in $\A^n_k$ that corresponds to precisely such vanishing sets are called <span def> algebraic sets </span>

$$
\begin{align*}
X \subset \A^n_k &\text{ is an algebraic set } \\
&\iff \\
X = \V(F) &\text{ for some } F \subset k[x_1, \dots, x_n].
\end{align*}
$$

</div>

Now, given such a set of polynomials $F \subset k[x_1, \dots, x_n]$, we can consider $\abrac{F}$, the ideal generated by $F$

$$
I = \abrac{F} = \set{\sum_{i = 1}^k a_i(x)f_i(x) \st k \in \N, f_i \in F, a_i \in k[x_1, \dots, x_n]}
$$

Observe that if a point $P \in A^n_k$ is a zero for all polynomials in $F$, then it is a zero for all polynomials in $I$ too. Conversely, since $F \subset I$, a common zero of polynomials in $I$ is a common zeros for those in $F$. We conclude, 

$$
\V(F) = \V(\abrac{F}) = \V(I).
$$

We shall henceforth always consider the ideal $\abrac{F}$ instead of just $F$ itself. Moreover, by Hilbert Basis Theorem, $k[x_1, \dots, x_n]$ is a noetherian ring<span sidenote> a ring if noetherian if all its ideals are finitely generated.</span>, even if the initial family of polynomial $F$ is infinite, there exist a finite set $\set{g_1, \dots, g_r}$ of generators of $\abrac{F}$ so that we can express the algebraic set as 

$$
\V(F) = \V(\abrac{F}) = \V(g_1, \dots, g_r).
$$


<!-- 
# First Consequences



<div class=theorem>
Definition (Algebraic sets) 
Definition (Zariski topology) 
Definition (Affine Variety)
</div>
 
Proposition (First consequences of definitions)


Theorem (Hilbert Nullstellensatz)

Proposition (Irreducible iff prime ideal)



Examples 
 - Irreducible polynomial generates prime ideals



Definition (Affine coordinate ring) 

Definition (Noetherian topological spaces and rings)
Proposition (Reduction to irreducible components)

Definition (Dimension of a topological space)
Definition (Height of a prime ideal and dimension of a ring)
Proposition (Dimension of affine variety = dimension of its coordinate ring)



Exercises -->